Transfer eager troubleshooting docs to nf-core website (#593)
nf-core/nf-co.re: markdown/usage/troubleshooting.md

subtitle: How to troubleshoot common mistakes and issues
---

- [Input files not found](#input-files-not-found)
- [The pipeline crashes almost immediately with an early pipeline step](#the-pipeline-crashes-almost-immediately-with-an-early-pipeline-step)
- [Image cannot be built](#image-cannot-be-built)
- [Cannot find input files when using Singularity](#cannot-find-input-files-when-using-singularity)
- [Warning about sticked on revision](#warning-about-sticked-on-revision)
- [I get a exceeded job memory limit error](#i-get-a-exceeded-job-memory-limit-error)
- [Crashed pipeline with an error but Nextflow is still running](#crashed-pipeline-with-an-error-but-nextflow-is-still-running)
- [My pipeline update doesn't seem to do anything](#my-pipeline-update-doesnt-seem-to-do-anything)
- [Unable to acquire lock error](#unable-to-acquire-lock-error)
- [Extra resources and getting help](#extra-resources-and-getting-help)

## Input files not found

If the pipeline can't find your files then you will get the following error

```bash
ERROR ~ Cannot find any reads matching: *{1,2}.fastq.gz
```

> Or when you're using a input method like --input '/<path>/<to>/*_fq.gz', but only pick up one file, or only one file per pair being processed during the run, please note the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Or when you're using a input method like `--input '/<path>/<to>/*_fq.gz'`, but only pick up one file, or only one file per pair being processed during the run, please note the following:
```

> Or when you're using a input method like --input '/<path>/<to>/*_fq.gz', but only pick up one file, or only one file per pair being processed during the run, please note the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Or when you're using a input method like `--input '/<path>/<to>/*_fq.gz'`, but only pick up one file, or only one file per pair being processed during the run, please note the following:
```

1. [The path must be enclosed in quotes (`'` or `"`)](#output-for-only-a-single-sample-although-i-specified-multiple-with-wildcards)
2. The path must have at least one `*` wildcard character. This is even if you are only running one paired end sample.
3. When using the pipeline with paired end data, the path must use `{1,2}` or `{R1,R2}` notation to specify read pairs.
    - This notation is interpreted by Nextflow to mean anything with the same string other than R1 and R2 in the file name, will be be assumed to be a pair of files.
4. If you are running single-end data make sure to specify `--singleEnd`
5. [Your data should be organised in a 'tidy' manner](#data-organization)

Note that if your sample name is "messy" then you have to be very particular with your glob specification. A file name like `L1-1-D-2h_S1_L002_R1_001.fastq.gz` can be difficult enough for a human to read. Specifying `*{1,2}*.gz` wont work give you what you want, whilst `*{R1,R2}*.gz` will.

> If you are using a sample sheet or TSV input method, check there is not a mistake or typo in the path in a given column. Common mistakes ar e a trailing space at the end of the path, which can cause problems.

Reviewer: Maybe move this into its own subheading..?

### Output for only a single sample although I specified multiple with wildcards

You must specify paths to files in quotes, otherwise your _shell_ (e.g. bash) will evaluate any wildcards (\*) rather than Nextflow.

For example:

```bash

> nextflow run nf-core/eager --input /path/to/sample_*/*.fq.gz

Reviewer: ```suggestion
nextflow run nf-core/<pipeline> --input /path/to/sample_*/*.fq.gz
```

> nextflow run nf-core/eager --input /path/to/sample_*/*.fq.gz

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
nextflow run nf-core/<pipeline> --input /path/to/sample_*/*.fq.gz
```

```

Maybe evaluated by your shell as:

```bash

> nextflow run nf-core/eager --input /path/to/sample_1/sample_1.fq.gz /path/to/sample_1/sample_1.fq.gz /path/to/sample_1/sample_1.fq.gz

Reviewer: ```suggestion
nextflow run nf-core/<pipeline> --input /path/to/sample_1/sample_1.fq.gz /path/to/sample_1/sample_1.fq.gz /path/to/sample_1/sample_1.fq.gz
```

> nextflow run nf-core/eager --input /path/to/sample_1/sample_1.fq.gz /path/to/sample_1/sample_1.fq.gz /path/to/sample_1/sample_1.fq.gz

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
nextflow run nf-core/<pipeline> --input /path/to/sample_1/sample_1.fq.gz /path/to/sample_1/sample_1.fq.gz /path/to/sample_1/sample_1.fq.gz
```

```

And Nextflow will only take the first path after `--input`, ignoring the others.

On the other hand, encapsulating the path in quotes will allow _Nextflow_ to evaluate the paths.

```bash

> nextflow run nf-core/eager --input "/path/to/sample_*/*.fq.gz"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
nextflow run nf-core/<pipeline> --input "/path/to/sample_*/*.fq.gz"
```

```

### Data organization

The pipeline can't take a list of multiple input files - it takes a glob expression. If your input files are scattered in different paths then we recommend that you generate a directory with symlinked files. If running in paired end mode please make sure that your files are sensibly named so that they can be properly paired. See the previous point.

## The pipeline crashes almost immediately with an early pipeline step

> Sometimes a newly downloaded and set up nf-core pipeline will encounter an issue where a run almost immediately crashes (e.g. at `fastqc`, `output_documentation` etc.) saying the tool could not be found or similar.

Reviewer: Maybe add a section that says something about HPC job schedulers? Or more generally - suggesting that people look at the error log and don't get distracted by the actual process that failed 🙄

Author: Not sure what you mean by HPC job schedulers?

Reviewer 2: slurm and similar schedulers I'd say

Reviewer 2: Pipeline could crash because of not enough memory, cpus, or other restrictions due to the scheduler itself

Author: Ok, I've not had that issue recently so can't give more specific advice/examples what that looks like, but added something for now we can expand late.r

Reviewer 2: I'll try to fake it

Reviewer 2: ```
Error executing process > 'Get_software_versions'

Caused by:
  Failed to submit process to grid scheduler for execution

Command executed:

  sbatch .command.run

Command exit status:
  1

Command output:
  sbatch: error: Batch job submission failed: Invalid account or account/partition combination specified

Work dir:
  /domus/h1/maxime/work/1e/e9f5eba379b65d7a37138e3b27fb93
```

### I am running Docker

You may have an outdated container. This happens more often when running on the `dev` branch of a nf-core pipeline, because Docker will _not_ update the container on each new commit, and thus may not get new tools called within the pipeline code.

To fix, just re-pull the pipeline's Docker container manually with:

```bash

> docker pull nfcore/<PIPELINE>:dev

Reviewer 2: Now I'm not sure if we use `<pipeline>` or `<PIPELINE>` in other docs.
But at least let's just be consistent in the same document
```suggestion
docker pull nfcore/<pipeline>:dev
```

```

### I am running Singularity

If you're running Singularity, it could be that Nextflow cannot access your Singularity image properly - often due to missing bind paths.

> 
> See
> [here](https://nf-co.re/usage/troubleshooting#cannot-find-input-files-when-using-singularity)
> for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See
[_Cannot find input files when using Singularity_](https://nf-co.re/usage/troubleshooting#cannot-find-input-files-when-using-singularity)
for more information.
```

> ## Image cannot be built

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Singularity image cannot be built
```

Reviewer: Would be good to move this and the next heading into a `## Singularity` section.

- [The pipeline crashes almost immediately with an early pipeline step](#the-pipeline-crashes-almost-immediately-with-an-early-pipeline-step)
  - [Error related to Docker](#error-related-to-docker)
  - [Error related to Singularity](#error-related-to-singularity)
- [Cannot find input files when using Singularity](#cannot-find-input-files-when-using-singularity)
- [Warning about sticked on revision](#warning-about-sticked-on-revision)
- [I get a exceeded job memory limit error](#i-get-a-exceeded-job-memory-limit-error)
- [Crashed pipeline with an error but Nextflow is still running](#crashed-pipeline-with-an-error-but-nextflow-is-still-running)
  - [A step of a pipeline wasn't executed](#a-step-of-a-pipeline-wasnt-executed)
- [My pipeline update doesn't seem to do anything](#my-pipeline-update-doesnt-seem-to-do-anything)
- [Unable to acquire lock error](#unable-to-acquire-lock-error)
- [Extra resources and getting help](#extra-resources-and-getting-help)

<!-- /TOC -->

## Input files not found

If the pipeline can't find your files then you will get the following error

```bash
ERROR ~ Cannot find any reads matching: *{1,2}.fastq.gz
```

### Direct input

> Or when you're using a input method like `--input '/<path>/<to>/*_fq.gz'`, but only pick up one file, or only one file per pair being processed during the run, please note the following:

Reviewer 2: I'll add that it should follow glob pattern matching: https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/essential/io/fileOps.html#glob

Reviewer 2: cf Nextflow docs

Reviewer 2: I did recommend using `[!bar]` and `{foo,baz}` to filter input files for sarek.

1. [The path must be enclosed in quotes (`'` or `"`)](#output-for-only-a-single-sample-although-i-specified-multiple-with-wildcards)
2. The path must have at least one `*` wildcard character. This is even if you are only running one paired end sample.
3. When using the pipeline with paired end data, the path must use `{1,2}` or `{R1,R2}` notation to specify read pairs.
    - This notation is interpreted by Nextflow to mean anything with the same string other than R1 and R2 in the file name, will be be assumed to be a pair of files.
4. If you are running single-end data make sure to specify `--singleEnd`
5. [Your data should be organised in a 'tidy' manner](#data-organization)

> Note that if your sample name is "messy" then you have to be very particular with your glob specification. A file name like `L1-1-D-2h_S1_L002_R1_001.fastq.gz` can be difficult enough for a human to read. Specifying `*{1,2}*.gz` wont work give you what you want, whilst `*{R1,R2}*.gz` will.

Reviewer 2: definitively need to explain `glob` before dropping it here

## The pipeline crashes almost immediately with an early pipeline step

Sometimes a newly downloaded and set up nf-core pipeline will encounter an issue where a run almost immediately crashes (e.g. at `fastqc`, `output_documentation` etc.) saying the tool could not be found or similar.

The first thing to do is always check the `.nextflow.log` to see if it reports contains specific error. Common cases are described below.

### Error related to Docker

You may have an outdated container. This happens more often when running on the `dev` branch of a nf-core pipeline, because Docker will _not_ update the container on each new commit, and thus may not get new tools called within the pipeline code.

To fix, just re-pull the pipeline's Docker container manually with:

```bash
docker pull nfcore/<pipeline>:dev
```

### Error related to Singularity

If you're running Singularity, it could be that Nextflow cannot access your Singularity image properly - often due to missing bind paths. See [_Cannot find input files when using Singularity_](https://nf-co.re/usage/troubleshooting#cannot-find-input-files-when-using-singularity) for more information.

> Sometimes, `mksquashfs` cannot be found on the login node or workstation that you intend to use, thus the Singularity Image build fails unfortunately. See below code snippet that shows such a typical failure:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sometimes, `mksquashfs` cannot be found on the login node or workstation that you intend to use, thus the Singularity image build fails unfortunately. See below code snippet that shows such a typical failure:
```

  - [Data organization](#data-organization)
- [The pipeline crashes almost immediately with an early pipeline step](#the-pipeline-crashes-almost-immediately-with-an-early-pipeline-step)
  - [Error related to Docker](#error-related-to-docker)
  - [Error related to Singularity](#error-related-to-singularity)
- [Cannot find input files when using Singularity](#cannot-find-input-files-when-using-singularity)
- [Warning about sticked on revision](#warning-about-sticked-on-revision)
- [I get a exceeded job memory limit error](#i-get-a-exceeded-job-memory-limit-error)
- [Crashed pipeline with an error but Nextflow is still running](#crashed-pipeline-with-an-error-but-nextflow-is-still-running)
  - [A step of a pipeline wasn't executed](#a-step-of-a-pipeline-wasnt-executed)
- [My pipeline update doesn't seem to do anything](#my-pipeline-update-doesnt-seem-to-do-anything)
- [Unable to acquire lock error](#unable-to-acquire-lock-error)
- [Extra resources and getting help](#extra-resources-and-getting-help)

## Input files not found

If the pipeline can't find your files then you will get the following error

```bash

> ERROR ~ Cannot find any reads matching: *{1,2}.fastq.gz

Reviewer 2: Could we have a minimal example that lead to this error?
I think error could be more understandable if we can see what is happening there.

I'm guessing here, the problem is most likely a typo

2. The path must have at least one `*` wildcard character i.e. following a ['glob' pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glob_(programming)). This is even if you are only running one paired end sample.
    - A description of valid pattern matching can be seen [here](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/essential/io/fileOps.html#glob) for java and [here](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/channel.html?highlight=glob#frompath) for Nextflow
3. When using the pipeline with paired end data, the path must use `{1,2}` or `{R1,R2}` notation to specify read pairs.
    - This notation is interpreted by Nextflow to mean anything with the same string other than R1 and R2 in the file name, will be be assumed to be a pair of files.
4. If you are running single-end data make sure to specify `--singleEnd`
5. [Your data should be organised in a 'tidy' manner](#data-organization)

Note that if your sample name is "messy" then you have to be very particular with your glob specification. A file name like `L1-1-D-2h_S1_L002_R1_001.fastq.gz` can be difficult enough for a human to read. Specifying `*{1,2}*.gz` wont work give you what you want, whilst `*{R1,R2}*.gz` will.

### Sample sheet input

> If you are using a sample sheet or TSV input method, check there is not a mistake or typo in the path in a given column. Common mistakes ar e a trailing space at the end of the path, which can cause problems.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you are using a sample sheet or TSV input method, check there is not a mistake or typo in the path in a given column. Common mistakes are a trailing space at the end of the path, which can cause problems.
```

If you get a warning like the following:

```bash
Project nf-core/<pipeline> currently is sticked on revision: dev -- you need to specify explicitly a revision with the option -r to use it
```

> This is a Nextflow error, with less commonly seen terminology. What this means is that you have multiple versions of the pipeline pulled (e.g. 2.0.0, 2.1.0, 2.1.1, dev etc.). When you have multiple versions, you must always specify which one you want to use - there is no 'default'. Therefore, with every `nextflow run nf-core/<PIPELINE>` command you must always indicate which version with `-r`.

Reviewer 2: Isn't default actually the default branch on GitHub, so actually `master` for a released pipeline, so the latest released pulled?

Author: Ah I see - I meant once you specify a specific version, there is no more 'default' (and you always have to specify which you are pulling).

Author: Oh wierd, I don't get that error anymore.

Reviewer 2: I sometimes have this error when there's a new release or the `dev` is updated and I try to run without pulling it first.

But I see what you mean, and I have no idea what should actually happen there.

You can see more information on the nextflow documentation [here](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/sharing.html#handling-revisions).

## I get a exceeded job memory limit error

While Nextflow tries to make your life easier by automatically retrying jobs that run out of memory with more resources (until a [specified max-limit](https://nf-co.re/usage/configuration#tuning-workflow-resources)), sometimes you may have such large data that you run out even after the default 3 retries.

To fix this you need to change the default memory requirements for the process that is breaking. We can do this by making a custom profile, which we then provide to the Nextflow run command.

For example, lets say it's the `markduplicates` process that is running out of memory (as displayed on the Nextflow running display).

> First we need to check to see what default memory value we have. We can do this by going to the main code of the pipeline by going to the corresponding pipeline GitHub repository and opening the `main.nf` file. You can then use your browser's find functionality for: `process markduplicates`.

Reviewer: Would prefer this and the subsequent paragraphs to be bullet points instead..

Once found, we then need to check the line called `label`. In this case the label could be `process_low`.

Next we need to go back to the main github repository, and open `conf/base.config`. Again using our find functionality, we search for: `withLabel:'process_low'`.

We see that the `memory` is set to `4.GB` with a line like: `memory = { check_max( 4.GB * task.attempt, 'memory' )})`.

Now back on your local PC, we need to make a new file called `custom_resources.conf`. You should save it somewhere centrally so you can reuse it.

> If you think this would be useful for multiple people in your lab/institute, we highly recommend you make an institutional profile at [nf-core/configs](https://github.com/nf-core/configs). This will simplify this process in the future.

Within this file, you will need to add the following:

> ```txt

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```nextflow
```

profiles {
    big_data {
      process {
        withName: markduplicates {
          memory = 16.GB
        }
      }
    }
}
```

Where we have increased the default `4.GB` to `16.GB`.

> > Note that with this you will _not_ have the automatic retry mechanism. If you want this, re-add the `check_max()` function on the `memory` line (as in the pipeline's `conf/base.config`) file, and add to the bottom of the entire file (outside the profiles block!). This block is the one starting with `def check_max(obj, type) {`, which is at the end of the [nextflow.config file](https://github.com/nf-core/eager/blob/master/nextflow.config)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note that with this you will _not_ have the automatic retry mechanism. If you want this, re-add the `check_max()` function on the `memory` line (as in the pipeline's `conf/base.config`) file, and add to the bottom of the entire file (outside the profiles block!). This block is the one starting with `def check_max(obj, type) {`, which is at the end of the pipeline's `nextflow.config` file.
```

> > Note that with this you will _not_ have the automatic retry mechanism. If you want this, re-add the `check_max()` function on the `memory` line (as in the pipeline's `conf/base.config`) file, and add to the bottom of the entire file (outside the profiles block!). This block is the one starting with `def check_max(obj, type) {`, which is at the end of the [nextflow.config file](https://github.com/nf-core/eager/blob/master/nextflow.config)

Reviewer 2: Should we like to template here?

Once saved, we can then modify your original Nextflow run command:

```bash

> nextflow run nf-core/<PIPELINE> -c /<path>/<to>/custom_resources.conf -profile big_data,<original>,<profiles> <...>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
nextflow run nf-core/<pipeline> -c /<path>/<to>/custom_resources.conf -profile big_data,<original>,<profiles> <...>
```

```

Where we have added `-c` to specify which file to use for the custom profiles, and then added the `big_data` profile to the original profiles you were using.

> :warning: it's important that big_data comes first, to ensure it overwrites any parameters set in the subsequent profiles!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:warning: it's important that the `big_data` profile name comes first, to ensure it overwrites any parameters set in the subsequent profiles. Profile names should be comma separated with no spaces.
```

## Crashed pipeline with an error but Nextflow is still running

If this happens, you can either wait until all other already running jobs to safely finish, or if Nextflow _still_ does not stop press `ctrl + c` on your keyboard (or equivalent) to stop the Nextflow run.

> > :warning: if you do this, and do not plan to fix the run make sure to delete the output folder. Otherwise you may end up a lot of large intermediate files being left! You can clean a Nextflow run of all intermediate files with `nextflow clean -f -k` or delete the `work/` directory.

Reviewer: Output is a bit ambiguous. You mean `results` or `work`? Or both?

```suggestion
> :warning: if you do this, and do not plan to fix the run make sure to delete the output folder. Otherwise you may end up a lot of large intermediate files being left! You can clean a Nextflow run of all intermediate files with `nextflow clean -f -k` or delete the `work/` directory.
```

> ### I specified a step of a pipeline to run and it wasn't executed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### A step of a pipeline wasn't executed
```

Possible options:

> 1. Check there if you have a typo in the parameter name. Nextflow _does not_ check for this

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. If an optional step, check for a typo in the parameter name. Nextflow _does not_ check for this
```

2. Check that an upstream step/process was turned on (if a step/process requires the output of an earlier process, it will not be activated unless it receives the output of that process)

## My pipeline update doesn't seem to do anything

To download a new version of a pipeline, you can use the following, replacing `<VERSION>` to the corresponding version.

For example for nf-core/eager:

```bash
nextflow pull nf-core/eager -r <VERSION>
```

> However, in very rare cases, minor fixes to a version will be pushed out without a version number bump. This can confuse Nextflow slightly, as it thinks you already have the 'broken' version from your original pipeline download.

Reviewer: What, really? Pretty sure that this should never happen?

Reviewer: Unless you mean with `-r dev`?

If when running the pipeline you don't see any changes in the fixed version when running it, you can try removing your nextflow EAGER cache typically stored in your home directory with (again for eager):

```bash
rm -r ~/.nextflow/assets/nf-core/eager
```

And re-pull the pipeline with the command above. This will install a fresh version of the version with the fixes.

## Unable to acquire lock error

Errors like the following:

```bash
Unable to acquire lock on session with ID 84333844-66e3-4846-a664-b446d070f775
```

Normally suggest a previous Nextflow run (on the same folder) was not cleanly killed by a user (e.g. using ctrl + z to hard kill a crashed run).

> To fix this, you must clean the entirety of the output directory (including output files) e.g. with `rm -r <output_dir>/* <output_dir>/.*` and re-running from scratch.

Reviewer: `<output dir>` is ambiguous. Better to specifically say the work directory I think.

Also, why not just `rm -r <output_dir>` instead of `rm -r <output_dir>/* <output_dir>/.*`?
